☕ Java Is-A Relationship (Inheritance) Practice Questions (Basic → Advanced)

The Is-A relationship in Java is implemented using inheritance (extends).

Example:

class Animal {
}

class Dog extends Animal {
}

Here, Dog IS-A Animal.

🟢 Basic Level (1–5)
1. Create a class Animal and a class Dog that extends Animal. Display a message from both classes.
2. Create a class Vehicle and a class Car that inherits from Vehicle. Print vehicle and car details.
3. Create a class Person and a class Student that extends Person. Display the student's information.
4. Create a class Shape and a class Circle that inherits from Shape. Calculate the area of the circle.
5. Create a class Employee and a class Manager that extends Employee. Print employee and manager details.
🟡 Intermediate Level (6–10)
6. Create a class Account and a class SavingsAccount that extends Account. Display account details and interest rate.
7. Create a class Book and a class EBook that extends Book. Print both book and eBook information.
8. Create a class Appliance and a class WashingMachine that inherits from Appliance.
9. Create a class Mobile and a class SmartPhone that extends Mobile. Add extra features in the child class.
10. Create a class Teacher and a class MathTeacher that inherits from Teacher and overrides a method.
🔴 Advanced Level (11–15)
11. Create a class Bank and child classes SBI and HDFC. Override the getInterestRate() method.
12. Create a class Animal with a sound() method and child classes Dog, Cat, and Cow that override the method.
13. Create a class Employee and child classes Developer and Tester with different salary calculations.
14. Create a multilevel inheritance example:

Animal → Mammal → Dog

Display methods from all three classes.

15. Create a hierarchical inheritance example:

Vehicle → Car
Vehicle → Bike

Display details for both child classes.

🏆 Challenge Level (16–20)
16. Create a class Person and subclasses Teacher, Student, and Principal. Display their specific details.
17. Create a class Shape and subclasses Rectangle, Circle, and Triangle. Override an area() method in each class.
18. Create a class Employee and subclasses Manager, Developer, and Intern. Calculate salaries differently for each.
19. Create a class ElectronicDevice and subclasses Laptop, Mobile, and Tablet with their own features.
20. Create a multilevel inheritance example:

Person → Employee → Manager

Demonstrate constructor chaining and method overriding.